1)What is Prometheus?
    Prometheus is an open-source monitoring and alerting system. 
    It collects metrics from applications, servers, containers, and Kubernetes by periodically scraping their 
    /metrics endpoints over HTTP. It stores these metrics as time-series data, supports querying with PromQL, 
    and integrates with Alertmanager for notifications.

2)What is Grafana?
    Grafana is a visualization platform. It connects to data sources like Prometheus, 
    Elasticsearch, Loki, and InfluxDB to create dashboards and graphs. Grafana itself does not store metrics.

3)Explain the Prometheus architecture.
    Application
      │
      │ /metrics
      ▼
    Prometheus
        │
        ├── Time-series database
        ├── PromQL
        └── Alert Rules
                │
                ▼
            Alertmanager
                │
        Slack / Email / PagerDuty

    Grafana
        │
    Reads from Prometheus

4)How does Prometheus collect metrics?
    Prometheus uses a pull model.
    Every few seconds (for example, every 15 seconds), it sends an HTTP request to the target's /metrics endpoint, 
    receives the metrics, and stores them.

5)What is Node Exporter?
    Node Exporter is an exporter that collects operating system metrics such as:
    CPU,Memory,Disk,Network,File system
    It exposes them on /metrics, which Prometheus scrapes.

6)What are Exporters?
    Exporters expose metrics in a Prometheus-compatible format.
    Examples: Node Exporter, kube-state-metrics,cAdvisor,Blackbox Exporter,MySQL Exporter,PostgreSQL Exporter

7)Push vs Pull in Prometheus
    Prometheus uses the pull model, to pull the metrics from the different, endpoint /metrics, this is the 
    default behaviour of the Prometheus. 

    Push is like Instead of Prometheus asking, applications sending the metrics to the Prometheus, and this
    method is called the Pushgateway.
    Apps doesnot directly push to the Prometheus, they push to the Pushgateway and Prometheus, pulls it form the 
    Pushgateway.(This is mostly used for short-lived jobs.)

    Does Prometheus supports push?
        Yes, but indirectly using Pushgateway. Prometheus itself still follows the pull model by scraping metrics from the Pushgateway.

7)What is kube-state-metrics?
    kube-state-metrics watches the Kubernetes API for object state, converts that information into Prometheus metrics, 
    exposes them on a /metrics endpoint, and Prometheus periodically scrapes that endpoint.

    kube-state-metrics is NOT pre-installed in a Kubernetes cluster. You need to install it separately.
    kube-state-metrics is an optional add-on, maintained by the Kubernetes community, specifically to expose Kubernetes object state as Prometheus metrics.
    
    Installation:
        If you install the Prometheus Community Kubernetes Stack (formerly kube-prometheus-stack) using Helm:
        It automatically installs:
        Prometheus, Alertmanager, Grafana, kube-state-metrics, Node Exporter

        How can you verify it's installed?
                kubectl get pods -n kube-system
            or, if using the Prometheus stack:
                kubectl get pods -n monitoring
        So in most production clusters, you don't install kube-state-metrics manually—it comes as part of the monitoring stack.

8)Difference between Node Exporter and cAdvisor?
    Node exporter Monitors the host machine(CPU, RAM, Disk)	and cAdvisor Monitors containers(Container CPU, Memory, Network)

9)What is a metric?
    A metric is simply a numerical measurement of data collected over time.
    node_cpu_seconds_total
    http_requests_total
    memory_usage_bytes
    disk_read_bytes_total

10)What is PromQL?
    PromQL (Prometheus Query Language) is the query language used to retrieve, filter, 
    aggregate, and perform calculations on metrics stored in Prometheus.

    you use PromQL to ask questions like:
    What is the CPU usage?
    Which pod has restarted the most?
    What is the average memory usage?
    How many HTTP requests occurred in the last 5 minutes?

    Grafana sends PromQL queries to Prometheus, and Prometheus returns the results to Grafana for visualization.

11)What is the up metric?
    From Prometheus side in order to pull the metrics, if the target is available it says these
    1 → Target is reachable
    0 → Target is down

12)How do you monitor Kubernetes using Prometheus?
    Install Prometheus (often with Helm).
    Install exporters like Node Exporter, kube-state-metrics, and cAdvisor.

    Prometheus discovers Kubernetes targets using service discovery.
    Prometheus scrapes metrics.
    Grafana displays dashboards.
    Alertmanager sends alerts.

13)What is Service Discovery?
    Instead of manually adding every target:
    server1,server2,server3

    Prometheus automatically discovers pods, services, and nodes from Kubernetes.
    This is called service discovery.

    How does Prometheus know about newly created Pods?
        In Kubernetes, Prometheus uses Service Discovery.
        Instead of manually adding targets, Prometheus queries the Kubernetes API.
        Whenever a new Pod starts, a Deployment scales, a Service changes
        Prometheus automatically updates its target list.

14)How do you monitor custom applications?
    Developers add a Prometheus client library.(prometheus_client)
    The application exposes: /metrics, Prometheus scrapes it.

15)What happens if Prometheus goes down?
    Metrics cannot be collected while it's down.
    Existing stored metrics remain available.
    After it comes back up, it resumes scraping.
    For production, use high availability and long-term storage solutions if needed.

16)What is Alertmanager?
    Alertmanager receives alerts from Prometheus and can:
        Group alerts,Suppress duplicates,Route alerts
        Send notifications to Slack, Email, Microsoft Teams, or PagerDuty

    If asked "Is Alertmanager part of Prometheus or Grafana?"
        Alertmanager is part of the Prometheus ecosystem. Prometheus evaluates alert rules and sends fired alerts to Alertmanager, 
        which handles grouping, deduplication, silencing, routing, and notifications to channels like Slack, Email, or PagerDuty. 
        
        Grafana also provides its own alerting feature, but Alertmanager is the traditional and most commonly used alerting component
        in Prometheus-based monitoring stacks.

        Which one is preferred?
            For most Kubernetes and DevOps environments, Prometheus + Alertmanager remains the standard approach because 
            it's tightly integrated with Prometheus and widely adopted.

17)Scrape Configurations
    How do you configure Prometheus to monitor a new application?
        we should know scrape_configs
        Things like: job_name, targets, scrape_interval, metrics_path, labels

18) Labels
    one of the biggest prometheus strength,Without labels, Prometheus wouldn't be nearly as useful.

    Labels are one of the most important concepts in Prometheus. 
    Without understanding labels, writing PromQL queries or creating Grafana dashboards becomes difficult.

    A label is a key-value pair attached to a metric that provides additional information about that metric.
    labels or like tags

    http_requests_total{
        job="frontend",
        instance="10.0.0.1:8080",
        method="GET",
        status="200"
    } 1250
    Everything inside {} are labels.

    Why do we need labels?
        Imagine you have 100 applications.
        Without labels, you'd need separate metrics like:
            frontend_http_requests_total
            backend_http_requests_total
            payment_http_requests_total

        This doesn't scale well.
        Instead, Prometheus uses one metric with different labels:
            http_requests_total{job="frontend"}
            http_requests_total{job="backend"}
            http_requests_total{job="payment"}
        Same metric name, different labels.

    Real Kubernetes Example
        Suppose you have three pods:
            frontend-abc,frontend-def,backend-xyz

        Prometheus might store:
            container_memory_usage_bytes{
                namespace="default",
                pod="frontend-abc",
                container="nginx"
            }

            container_memory_usage_bytes{
                namespace="default",
                pod="frontend-def",
                container="nginx"
            }

            container_memory_usage_bytes{
                namespace="default",
                pod="backend-xyz",
                container="java"
            }
        Notice that the metric name is the same. The labels tell us which pod and container the metric belongs to.

        Labels make filtering possible easy
            Suppose you need only, http related requests
            http_requests_total{
                status="500"
            }

        Labels enable grouping
            Suppose every pod exposes CPU usage.
                Without grouping: container_cpu_usage_seconds_total

                You might get:
                    frontend-1 = 0.20
                    frontend-2 = 0.25
                    backend-1 = 0.50
                    backend-2 = 0.45

            If you want total CPU per namespace:
                sum by(namespace)(
                    container_cpu_usage_seconds_total
                )
                Result: default = 1.40

                sum by(job)(
                    http_requests_total{job="frontend"}
                )

        Labels are used everywhere PromQL,Alerting,dashboards
        Where do labels come from? Different exporters add different labels.

        Remember this simple rule:
            sum() → One total across all matching metrics.
            sum by(label) → One total per unique value of that label.
            {job="frontend"} → Filters metrics before the aggregation.
        

19)ServiceMonitor & PodMonitor
    ServiceMonitor and PodMonitor are Kubernetes custom resources used by the Prometheus Operator 
    to tell Prometheus what to scrape. They eliminate the need to manually edit prometheus.yml

    Before ServiceMonitor & PodMonitor
        In a standalone Prometheus setup, you manually configure scrape targets:
        scrape_configs:
        - job_name: "my-app"
            static_configs:
            - targets:
                - 10.10.10.5:8080

    This works fine for VMs, but in Kubernetes:
        Pods are created and destroyed frequently.
        Pod IPs change.
        Scaling changes the number of pods.
    Manually updating prometheus.yml isn't practical.

    Prometheus Operator Solution: Instead of editing prometheus.yml, you create Kubernetes resources like:
    ServiceMonitor, PodMonitor
    The Prometheus Operator watches these resources and automatically updates Prometheus.

    What is a ServiceMonitor?
        A ServiceMonitor tells Prometheus,Scrape all Pods that are exposed through this Kubernetes Service.
        Pods, Service, ServiceMonitor, Prometheus

        Create a ServiceMonitor:
            apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
            kind: ServiceMonitor

            spec:
            selector:
                matchLabels:
                app: frontend

            endpoints:
                - port: metrics

    What is a PodMonitor?
        A PodMonitor skips the Service completely.
        It tells Prometheus: Scrape Pods directly
        Pods,PodMonitor,Prometheus

        apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
        kind: PodMonitor

        spec:
        selector:
            matchLabels:
            app: frontend

        podMetricsEndpoints:
            - port: metrics
    
    Which one is preferred?
        ServiceMonitor, Because applications are normally exposed through a Kubernetes Service.

    When do we use PodMonitor?
        PodMonitor is useful when, No Service exists and want to scrape the pods individually.
    
20)Prometheus Operator
    kubectl apply -f servicemonitor.yaml
    
    What is an Operator?
        In Kubernetes, an Operator is software that extends Kubernetes by watching custom resources (CRDs) 
        and automatically performing operational tasks.

        The Operator notices,A new ServiceMonitor was created.It automatically updates Prometheus.

        What does the Prometheus Operator manage?
            PrometheusRule,PodMonitor,ServiceMonitor

        Developer

        kubectl apply -f servicemonitor.yaml
                │
                ▼
        ServiceMonitor CRD
                │
                ▼
        Prometheus Operator
                │
                ▼
        Updates Prometheus configuration
                │
                ▼
        Prometheus starts scraping automatically
    
    Where does Helm come in?
        Most companies don't install the Operator by writing manifests manually.
        Instead they use the Prometheus Community Helm chart (often called kube-prometheus-stack).
        One command: helm install monitoring prometheus-community/kube-prometheus-stack

        This installs:
        Prometheus Operator
        Prometheus
        Alertmanager
        Grafana
        kube-state-metrics
        Node Exporter
        CRDs((Custom Resource Definition) like ServiceMonitor, PodMonitor, and PrometheusRule

    So when people say: We installed Prometheus,They often actually mean:
    We installed the kube-prometheus-stack, which includes the Prometheus Operator.

    Have you used the Prometheus Operator?
        Yes. We deployed the kube-prometheus-stack using Helm. 
        The Prometheus Operator managed Prometheus and Alertmanager, and we used ServiceMonitor resources 
        to automatically discover and scrape application metrics instead of manually maintaining scrape_configs in prometheus.yml

    CRD = “What I want” (ServiceMonitor, PodMonitor, PrometheusRule)
    Operator = “Do it for me”

    CRD alone does nothing,Operator alone is useless without CRDs.They always work together.

21)Reconciliation Loop in Kubernetes Operator
    A reconciliation loop is the continuous process where a Kubernetes Operator checks 
    the current state of the cluster and makes it match the desired state defined by the user.

    Observe → Compare → Fix → Repeat

22)Recording Rules in Prometheus
    Recording rules precompute PromQL queries and store the result as a new metric.
    Why do we need them? So instead of computing again and again precompute once, store result.

    Reconciliation Loop → Keeps system in desired state (Operator)
    Recording Rule → Keeps metrics precomputed (Prometheus)


23)Recording Rules vs Alerting Rules
    Precompute and store query results | Detect problems and generate alerts
    Creates a new metric | Creates an alert

24)Retention
    In Prometheus, Retention refers to how long Prometheus keeps collected metrics before deleting them.
        Why do we need retention?
            Prometheus continuously collects metrics.
            Suppose:
                500 Pods
                100 Nodes
                20,000 metrics
                Scrape every 15 seconds
            Every scrape generates more data.Eventually the disk fills up.

        If you're using kube-prometheus-stack, you don't usually pass command-line flags directly.
        Instead, you configure the Prometheus custom resource.

        prometheus:
            prometheusSpec:
                retention: 15d

        What is the default retention in Prometheus?
            By default, Prometheus retains data for 15 days, assuming storage constraints don't remove it earlier.

25)how you design a highly available monitoring system.
    High Availability (HA) means designing the monitoring system so that it continues to work even if one Prometheus instance fails.
    
    The simplest HA setup is to run two identical Prometheus servers.

    Both Prometheus instances:
        Scrape the same targets.
        Store their own copy of the metrics.
        Evaluate the same alert rules.

    If one fails,other still Monitors
    
    Why scrape the same targets?
        Because Prometheus doesn't replicate data between instances.
        Each Prometheus keeps its own TSDB. So both must collect the same metrics independently.
    
        What about duplicate alerts?
            If both Prometheus instances evaluate the same alert,Won't you get two Slack messages?
                No.Alertmanager deduplicates alerts.
                So even if both Prometheus servers send the same alert, 
                Alertmanager recognizes they're identical and sends only one notification.

    What is a Single Point of Failure (SPOF)?
        A Single Point of Failure is any component whose failure brings down the entire system.


26)What are Grafana Variables?
    Grafana Variables are dynamic placeholders that allow dashboards to be interactive.
    You build one dashboard.The entire dashboard updates automatically.

    Where do variable values come from?
    Grafana queries Prometheus to populate the dropdown.
    Grafana uses these values in the dropdown.

    Chained Variables:
        Variables can depend on each other.
        First select Namespace,Then Pod dropdown automatically changes.
        This is called a chained (or dependent) variable.

    To make dashboards reusable and interactive, allowing users to filter data without creating multiple dashboards.
    Grafana Variables are dynamic placeholders that make dashboards interactive and reusable. Instead of hardcoding values like a namespace, pod, or node, variables allow users to select them from dropdown menus.

27)How do you secure Prometheus?
    There are four major areas interviewers expect you to know:
    RBAC,TLS,Authentication & Authorization,NetworkPolicies

    To secure Prometheus in Kubernetes, I would use RBAC to grant only the minimum read permissions required for service discovery.
    