1)EC2 Fundamentals
    EC2 (Elastic Compute Cloud) is AWS's virtual server where we can deploy applications.
    It allows us to provision compute resources without managing physical hardware.

    In production, EC2 is generally used to host:
        Web applications
        APIs
        Jenkins servers
        Bastion Hosts
        Self-hosted GitHub runners
        Databases (less common nowadays)
        Kubernetes worker nodes (EKS self-managed)

        Instead of buying servers, AWS provisions virtual servers within minutes.

2)EC2 Lifecycle
    Launch
    ↓
    Pending
    ↓
    Running
    ↓
    Stopping
    ↓
    Stopped
    ↓
    Starting
    ↓
    Running
    ↓
    Reboot
    ↓
    Terminate

    Pending:
        AWS is preparing Hypervisor,Network,Storage,ENI,EBS
        Cannot login at this moment.
    Running:
        Server is available. 
        SSH works, Applications run, Billing starts.
    Stopping:
        OS shuts down gracefully.
    Stopped:
        CPU gone, Memory gone, Only EBS remains. 
        You pay only for EBS, Elastic IP (sometimes)
        No compute charges.
    Starting:
        AWS allocates hardware again.
        Instance ID remains same,Private IP usually remains,Public IP changes (unless Elastic IP).
    Reboot:
        Equivalent to Linux reboot.
        No hardware change, No IP change, Very fast.
    Terminated:
        Instance permanently deleted.
        Instance Store data lost,EBS deleted only if DeleteOnTermination=true.
        Cannot recover.

    ------------
    Questions:
        When an EC2 instance is stopped, does AWS reserve the CPU and RAM for that instance?
            No. When an EBS-backed EC2 instance is stopped, AWS deallocates the underlying compute resources, 
            including the vCPU and RAM. Only the persistent storage, such as the EBS volume and the instance metadata, is retained. 
            When the instance is started again, AWS allocates compute resources on a suitable physical host, which may or may not be 
            the same host as before, and reattaches the existing EBS volume.
        
        When ec2 starts again, how will it attach the correct ebs to ec2?
            Each instance has a unique Instance ID and each volume has a unique Volume ID.
            AWS already knows which EBS volume belongs to which EC2 instance through metadata stored in its control plane.

            The root EBS volume must be in the same Availability Zone as the EC2 instance.
            AWS cannot attach an EBS volume from ap-south-1b directly to an EC2 instance in ap-south-1a.

        Why Doesn't Reboot Release CPU/RAM?
            A reboot is just an OS restart.AWS does not remove the VM from the host.
            So:
                CPU remains allocated ✅
                RAM remains allocated (though its contents are cleared during reboot) ✅
                Public IP remains the same ✅
                Private IP remains the same ✅

        Why Does Public IP Change when Stopped?
            Since the VM may start on a different host, AWS doesn't guarantee you'll get the same public IPv4 address.
            Unless you use an Elastic IP, which remains the same.

            The private IP within your VPC normally stays the same because it belongs to the ENI, not to the underlying hardware.

3)Instance Types
    Different workloads need different hardware.AWS provides optimized instance families.
    
    General Purpose (T/M)
        Example:
            t3.micro
            t3.medium
            m5.large

        we get Balanced CPU, RAM, Cheap
        Used for Web servers,APIs,Jenkins,Small databases

    Compute Optimized (C)
        c5.large, c6i.large
        
        More CPU, Less RAM
        Used for Java,Compilation,Batch jobs,Video encoding

    Memory Optimized (R/X)
        r5.large, r6g.large, Large RAM

        Used for Redis,Elasticsearch,SAP, Large databases

    Storage Optimized (I/D)
        Example: i4i.large Very fast SSD

        Used for Kafka,Cassandra,ElasticSearch

    GPU
        g5, p5
        Used for Machine Learning, AI, Rendering

    ----------
    Questions:

        How do you choose instance type?
            Depends on workload.CPU intensive or Memory or storage
            in generally for Balanced applications choose type t/M

4)AMI (Amazon Machine Image)
    AMI is a preconfigured machine image containing OS, software, and configuration. 
    In production, organizations typically build custom golden AMIs using tools like Packer so every EC2 launched is standardized.

    Think of AMI as template
    Contains
        OS + Packages + Configurations + Applications

    Types of AMI
        AWS Managed, Marketplace, Custom AMI

    Custom AMI:
        Instead of installing applications on every deployment,
        
        Company creates one AMI containing Ubuntu,Java,Docker,CloudWatch Agent,Security patches,Application dependencies
        Every EC2 launched from this AMI is identical.

        Instead of installing Docker every deployment,
            Pipeline
            ↓
            Build AMI using Packer
            ↓
            Store AMI
            ↓
            Launch new EC2
            ↓
            Deploy application
        This makes deployments faster and consistent.

        Packer:
            Packer is an Infrastructure as Code tool used to create machine images automatically. 
            In AWS, it is commonly used to build custom AMIs. We define a template that specifies a base AMI, 
            a temporary EC2 instance configuration, and provisioning steps such as installing Docker, Java, CloudWatch Agent, or 
            application dependencies. During execution, Packer launches a temporary EC2 instance, provisions it over SSH, creates a 
            new AMI from the configured instance, and then terminates the temporary EC2. This provides consistent, versioned, and reusable 
            AMIs that can be used by Launch Templates, Auto Scaling Groups, and other deployment workflows.

            Here Packer is a separate tool, developed by hcl we use that and do
                packer init .
                packer build .
            Every new instance starts with everything pre-installed.

        ----------
        Questions:
            Is Packer part of Terraform?
                No, 
                Packer = Creates the image 
                Terraform = manage resources

            Why not let Terraform install everything?
                Terraform is intended for provisioning infrastructure, while Packer is intended for creating immutable machine images. 
                We use Packer to pre-install software and create a versioned AMI. Terraform then launches instances from that AMI, 
                resulting in faster boot times, more consistent environments, and reduced configuration drift.
                
                There are drawbacks with Terraform:
                    Every EC2 repeats the installation.
                    Instance startup takes longer.

            Where are AMIs stored?
                When Packer finishes building an AMI, you do not push it anywhere manually.
                Packer calls the AWS EC2 API(CreateImage),AWS automatically registers the AMI in your AWS account.
                The AMI now appears under AMI section.

            AMIs are immutable??
                AMIs are read-only after creation.You do not modify an existing AMI. 
                You build a new AMI and have your infrastructure use the new AMI.

                AMIs are immutable, so we don't modify an existing AMI. 
                We update the Packer template, build a new versioned AMI, test it, and then update the Launch Template or Auto Scaling Group 
                to use the new AMI. Existing instances are gradually replaced through a rolling deployment. 
                We also keep older AMIs for rollback until we're confident the new version is stable.

            
5)Regions & Availability Zones
    AWS Region:
        A Region is a geographic area where AWS operates infrastructure. 
        Each Region contains multiple Availability Zones and is isolated from other Regions.

        Examples:
            Mumbai → ap-south-1
            Singapore → ap-southeast-1

            Think of a Region as a city or metropolitan area where AWS operates infrastructure.
            Each Region is isolated from the others, which helps with fault isolation and compliance.

    Availability Zone (AZ):
        An Availability Zone is one or more physically separate data centers within a Region. 
        Each AZ has independent power, cooling, and networking, and is connected to other AZs 
        in the same Region using low-latency private networking.

            Example:
                Region: ap-south-1 (Mumbai)
                ├── ap-south-1a
                ├── ap-south-1b
                └── ap-south-1c

                Each AZ has:
                Independent power
                Independent cooling
                Independent networking

                They are connected to other AZs in the same Region using high-speed, low-latency private links.
    ----------
    Questions:

        1. Why do we have multiple AZs?
            To improve high availability.Suppose your application runs only in one AZ, ap-south-1a. If that AZ experiences an outage:
            then it will be difficult to handle, that's why multiple AZ concept came.

        2. Region vs Availability Zone?
            | Region                      | Availability Zone                                   |
            | --------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
            | Geographic location         | Separate data center(s) within a Region             |
            | Example: `ap-south-1`       | Example: `ap-south-1a`                              |
            | Contains multiple AZs       | Belongs to one Region                               |
            | Isolated from other Regions | Connected privately to other AZs in the same Region |

        3. Why deploy across multiple AZs?
            Because it provides:
            High availability
            Fault tolerance
            Protection against the failure of a single AZ

            For example, services like an Application Load Balancer can distribute traffic across EC2 instances in multiple AZs, 
            and Amazon RDS can be configured for Multi-AZ deployments.
        
        4. Can an EC2 instance be in multiple AZs?
            No.An EC2 instance is launched in exactly one Availability Zone.
            If you need redundancy, you launch multiple EC2 instances in different AZs and place a load balancer.

        5. An EC2 instance can exist in only one Availability Zone??

            Scenario 1: Single EC2 (Single AZ)
                Suppose you launch one EC2: Region: ap-south-1, If AZ-a goes down, Your application is unavailable.

            Scenario 2: Two EC2s in Different AZs
                Instead of one EC2, launch two:
                Region: ap-south-1
                AZ-a                 AZ-b
                EC2-1                EC2-2

            Now you have redundancy, but there's a problem:
            How do users know which EC2 to connect to?
            Should they use: EC2-1 IP?  EC2-2 IP?

            If EC2-1 fails, how will users automatically switch to EC2-2?
            This is exactly what a Load Balancer solves.

        6. Load Balancer:
            A Application Load Balancer sits in front of your EC2 instances.
                            Users
                                │
                                ▼
                    Application Load Balancer
                                │
                    ┌──────────┴──────────┐
                    ▼                     ▼
                AZ-a                  AZ-b
                EC2-1                 EC2-2

            Users only know one DNS name (the load balancer's address).
            The Load Balancer decides which healthy EC2 should receive each request.

            What if EC2-1 crashes, The Load Balancer performs health checks.
            It stops sending traffic to EC2-1. It sends all traffic to EC2-2.
            Users usually don't notice the failure.

            What if the entire AZ fails?
                Traffic continues to EC2-2 in AZ-b.
                This is why AWS recommends deploying across multiple AZs.

            Where is the Load Balancer deployed?
                This is another common interview question.
                An Application Load Balancer (ALB) is not tied to a single AZ. It was a regional service.

                When you create an ALB, you select multiple subnets, typically one subnet in each AZ.
                Example: Region: ap-south-1
                    AZ-a
                    Subnet-A
                        │
                        ▼
                    ALB Node

                    AZ-b
                    Subnet-B
                        │
                        ▼
                    ALB Node

                AWS creates load balancer nodes in each selected AZ and manages them for you. 
                To you, it appears as one load balancer with one DNS name.

6)AWS EC2 Key Pair
    A Key Pair is used to securely connect (SSH) to an EC2 Linux instance.
    It consists of two keys: public and private, aws stores the public and we have the private with us, .pem

    How it works?
        When you create an EC2 instance, AWS places Public Key inside EC2, ~/.ssh/authorized_keys

        ssh -i my-key.pem ubuntu@<EC2-public-IP>

    Why do we need Key Pairs?
        Because AWS does not allow password-based SSH login by default.
        AWS uses: private key + public key authentication which is much more secure.

    What happens if you lose the .pem file?
        You cannot download the same private key again from AWS. AWS does not store your private key.

        Recovery options
            Option 1: Use another user/key
                If you have another way to access the instance: ssh new-key.pem ubuntu@server
                
                Add a new public key: cat new-key.pub >> ~/.ssh/authorized_keys
                
                Now you can connect using the new private key.

            Option 2: Create a new AMI
                Create a new AMI from the instance, launch a new instance with a new key pair.

            Option 3: Use AWS Systems Manager Session Manager
                If SSM Agent is configured:

                AWS Console
                    |
                    |
                Systems Manager Session Manager
                    |
                    |
                Shell access

                No SSH key required.
        
7)Elastic IP (EIP)
    An Elastic IP address is a static public IPv4 address provided by AWS that you can associate with an EC2 instance.
    To keep the same public IP address even if you stop/start an EC2 instance.

    Why do we need Elastic IP?
        By default, an EC2 instance gets a public IPv4 address when launched.
        But if you stop and start the EC2 instance, The public IP changes.

        This is a problem if:
            Users access your application using IP
            DNS records point to that IP
            External systems whitelist your IP
        
        Elastic IP is a Regional Resource, An Elastic IP belongs to a Region, not an Availability Zone.

        Can we move Elastic IP between instances?
            Yes. After one ec2 fails, we can use it.

        Elastic IP with Load Balancer
            In modern architectures, you usually do not attach Elastic IPs directly to application EC2 instances.

            EC2 instances can change.
            Auto Scaling creates new instances.
            Load Balancer provides a stable endpoint.

        Elastic IP with NAT Gateway
            Private EC2 instances need internet access for updates.
                
                Private EC2
                    |
                NAT Gateway
                    |
                Elastic IP
                    |
                Internet
            External websites see the NAT Gateway's Elastic IP.

        Elastic IP vs Public IP
            | Public IPv4                                     | Elastic IP                        |
            | ----------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------- |
            | Automatically assigned                          | Manually allocated                |
            | Changes after stop/start                        | Static                            |
            | Cannot move easily                              | Can move between instances        |
            | Free while attached (depending on AWS policies) | Charges may apply for unused EIPs |
            | Instance-specific                               | Regional resource                 |

8)Public IP vs Private IP
    | Public IP                | Private IP         |
    | ------------------------ | ------------------ |
    | Internet reachable       | VPC only           |
    | Changes after stop/start | Usually stays same |
    | Globally unique          | VPC unique         |
    | Used by users            | Used internally    |


9)Can two EC2s communicate using Public IP?
    Yes.
    Should they?
        No.
    Always use Private IP inside VPC.
        Lower latency.
        No internet.
        More secure.

10)ENI (Elastic Network Interface)
    An Elastic Network Interface (ENI) is a virtual network card (NIC) attached to an EC2 instance.

    Think of it exactly like the network card inside your laptop.
        Your laptop has a physical network card.
        An EC2 instance has a virtual network card, called an ENI.

        EC2 Instance
        ┌────────────────────────┐
        │                        │
        │   Operating System     │
        │                        │
        │   eth0 (Primary ENI)   │────────► VPC Network
        │                        │
        └────────────────────────┘
        Without an ENI, an EC2 instance cannot communicate over the network.

        What does an ENI contain?
            An ENI stores the networking configuration for an EC2 instance.
            The ENI is simply the EC2's virtual network card.

            It includes:
                Private IP address
                Optional secondary private IP addresses
                Public IP or Elastic IP (if associated)
                MAC address
                Security Groups
                Subnet information

            Think of it like this:
                ENI

                ├── Private IP
                ├── Secondary IPs
                ├── MAC Address
                ├── Security Groups
                ├── Elastic IP (optional)
                └── Subnet

            Suppose you launch an EC2.AWS automatically creates ENI-1234

            Primary ENI(eth0)
                Every EC2 instance has at least one ENI.This is called the Primary ENI.
                You cannot detach the primary ENI while the instance is running.

            Secondary ENIs(eth1)
                Some instance types support attaching additional ENIs.
                EC2
                ├── eth0
                │
                ├── eth1
                │
                └── eth2

            Each ENI can have:
                Different Security Groups
                Different Private IPs
                Different Elastic IPs (where applicable)

            Why use multiple ENIs?
                Imagine a server handling both application traffic and management traffic.
                EC2
                        ┌────────────────────┐
                        │                    │
                eth0 ───► Production Network
                        │
                eth1 ───► Management Network
                        └────────────────────┘

                Benefits include:
                    Separating traffic
                    Different Security Groups
                    Different subnets (within the same Availability Zone)
                    Easier failover in some architectures

        ENI and Elastic IP
            Many people think the Elastic IP belongs directly to the EC2.
            The Elastic IP is associated with the ENI.
            Security Groups are also attached to the ENI.
            This is why changing the Security Group is really changing the ENI's configuration.

        Can an ENI move between instances?
            Yes. You can detach a secondary ENI from one EC2 instance and attach it to another 
            compatible EC2 instance within the same Availability Zone.

        Can one ENI belong to multiple EC2 instances?
            One ENI can be attached to only one EC2 instance at a time.

        An ENI is created in a specific subnet, and since a subnet belongs to one Availability Zone, 
        the ENI also belongs to that AZ.
        Therefore, if you detach an ENI from one instance, you can only attach it to 
        another instance in the same AZ. You cannot move an ENI across Availability Zones or Regions.


        Are the Private IP and Public IP stored in the ENI?
            The private IP belongs to the ENI.If you detach this ENI and attach it to another EC2, that EC2 gets the same private IP.

        
        Elastic IP is associated with the ENI, not directly with the EC2.
        The ENI is still the same. The Elastic IP is still associated with that ENI.
        Therefore:
            Private IP = Same ✅
            Public IP = Same ✅

        