1) ELK stack
    The elk stack is a powerful trio of open source tools designed for log management
    and analysis, It consists of three main components Elastic Search, Log Stash, Kibana
    
    together they provide a solution for collecting and storing, searching and visualization of log data.

2)Need of ELK
    Imagine you're running an e-commerce application,Your Flask app is continuously writing logs like
    2026-07-08 10:15:23 INFO User logged in
    2026-07-08 10:15:24 INFO Product searched
    2026-07-08 10:15:25 ERROR Payment failed
    2026-07-08 10:15:27 INFO Retry successful
    Now imagine there are 50 Pods,20 Microservices Millions of log lines every day.

    You need one central place to store and search all logs. That is exactly why ELK exists.

    What is ELK?
        ELK is simply a log management system.
        It has three jobs:
            Collect logs,Store logs,Search and visualize logs
        Applications -- Collect Logs -- Store Logs -- Search Logs


    Elasticsearch?
        It is simply a database that is optimized for searching.


    Logstash?
        Logstash reads logs and converts them into one common structure.
        Now Elasticsearch can index and search them consistently.

    Kibana?
        Kibana is the user interface. Imagine Elasticsearch has one million logs.
        Kibana gives you a web dashboard where you can:
        Search logs, Filter logs, Create graphs, Build dashboards, Monitor applications
        
        Instead of reading text files, you get visual insights.
    
    Do we always need Logstash?
        No,In reality, if your application already produces clean structured logs (for example, JSON), you can skip Logstash entirely
        Logstash is added when you need parsing, filtering, transformations, or enrichment.

3) Why did we use Fluent Bit instead of Filebeat?
    Both Fluent Bit and Filebeat do almost the same job.
    They are both log collectors (or log shippers).
    They sit on every Kubernetes node, read container logs, and send them somewhere else.

    Application
        │
    stdout
        │
    Fluent Bit
        │
    Logstash (optional)
        │
    Elasticsearch
        │
    Kibana

    Fluent Bit was designed to be extremely lightweight.
    Fluent Bit can attach Kubernetes metadata,This is called log enrichment.

    Fluent Bit already reads logs, so why Logstash?
        Fluent Bit says: "I collected the log."
        Logstash says: "Let me extract useful fields."
        It converts it into something structured like:
            {
            "event":"Payment Failed",
            "userId":1001,
            "amount":500,
            "level":"ERROR"
            }
        Now Elasticsearch can index those fields separately, making searches like userId:1001 or amount>100 much easier.

    Can Fluent Bit replace Logstash?
        Yes, for many use cases.

        Fluent Bit has filters that can:
            Add Kubernetes metadata
            Parse JSON
            Rename fields
            Drop unwanted logs
            Modify records

        Then why do companies still use Logstash?
            Because Logstash is much more powerful.
                Examples:
                Parse complex Apache/Nginx logs
                Extract fields using Grok patterns
                Merge logs from multiple sources
                Transform data extensively
                Route logs to multiple destinations
                Enrich logs using databases or external lookups

4)Elasticsearch
    Elasticsearch Architecture (Detailed Summary)
    
    Imagine your company has a microservices application running on Kubernetes.
    Every second, thousands of logs are generated:
        User login logs
        Payment service logs
        Nginx access logs
        Kubernetes pod logs
    These logs are collected by Fluent Bit and sent to Elasticsearch.
    Now imagine after six months you have 500 GB or even several TB of logs. 
    The challenge is how Elasticsearch stores all this data, searches it within milliseconds,
    and still keeps it available even if servers fail. That's where the architecture comes in.


    Cluster
        A cluster is simply a group of Elasticsearch servers (called nodes) working together as one logical system.
        Think of it like a Kubernetes cluster.
            Kubernetes Cluster

            Master
            ├── Worker-1
            ├── Worker-2
            └── Worker-3

            Similarly,

            Elasticsearch Cluster

            Node-1
            Node-2
            Node-3

        Although there are three physical servers, users interact with them as if they were one Elasticsearch instance.

        Example
            Suppose your company stores 10 TB of application logs.
            Instead of storing all 10 TB on one server, Elasticsearch distributes the data across multiple nodes in the cluster.

            This provides:
            Better performance
            Higher storage capacity
            High availability
            Fault tolerance
    
    Node
        A node is a single Elasticsearch server that is part of the cluster.
        If your cluster has three virtual machines running Elasticsearch, then you have three nodes.

        Example:
        Cluster

        ├── Node-1
        ├── Node-2
        └── Node-3

        Each node contributes:
        CPU
        RAM
        Storage
        to the cluster.
        Instead of one server doing all the work, multiple servers share the load.

    Index
        If you're familiar with SQL,
            Database
            ↓
            Table

            In Elasticsearch,

            Cluster
            ↓
            Index

        An index is where similar documents are stored.
        Examples:
            employee, orders, products, payments, flask-logs

        In logging systems, every log generally belongs to an index.
        For example: 
        flask-logs: contains all Flask application logs.
        payment-logs: contains payment service logs.

    Document
        A document is one JSON object.
            Example:

            {
            "timestamp": "2026-07-08T10:30:20",
            "service": "payment",
            "level": "ERROR",
            "message": "Database timeout"
            }

            This entire JSON object is one document.

            If another request generates another log,

            {
            "timestamp":"2026-07-08T10:31:10",
            "service":"payment",
            "level":"INFO",
            "message":"Payment successful"
            }

            that's another document.

            So,

            Index

            ├── Document
            ├── Document
            ├── Document
            └── Document

            Exactly like rows inside a SQL table.
    
    Shards
        Now imagine your flask-logs index has become 5 TB.
        Can one machine search through 5 TB quickly?
            Probably not. Instead of keeping one huge index, Elasticsearch splits the index 
            into smaller pieces called shards.

            Example: flask-logs
                Shard-1, Shard-2, Shard-3
                Think of a pizza.
                Instead of one giant pizza,you cut it into slices.Each slice is easier to handle.

                Similarly,each shard stores only part of the index.
                Example:
                Node-1 → Shard-1
                Node-2 → Shard-2
                Node-3 → Shard-3

        Now when someone searches,all three nodes search simultaneously.
        Instead of one server searching,three servers search together.
        That's why Elasticsearch is fast.

    Primary Shards
        Every shard starts as a primary shard.
        
        Difference between Primary and Replica
            Primary shard
                Stores the original data
                Receives all write requests
                Only one active primary exists for each shard

            Replica shard
                Exact copy of the primary
                Does not receive direct writes
                Used for failover
                Can participate in search operations
        
        Only after the document is successfully written to the primary shard,Elasticsearch copy it to the replica shards.
        Both contain identical data.If Node-1 fails, Replica-1 is immediately promoted to become the new primary.
        Your application continues working without data loss.

    Inverted Index (Why Elasticsearch Searches So Fast)
        This is the core reason Elasticsearch is much faster than scanning data line by line.
        Suppose you have three documents.
        A normal database might scan every document looking for the word "Kubernetes".

        Elasticsearch instead creates something like this internally:
        Kubernetes
        ↓
        Document-1
        Document-2

        Docker
        ↓
        Document-3

        love
        ↓
        Document-1

        This structure is called an Inverted Index.
        Notice that the words are the keys, and the values are the document IDs.

        Instead of reading every document,
        Elasticsearch immediately knows which documents contain the searched word.
        That's why searches across billions of logs often take only milliseconds.

        So does Elasticsearch replace the documents with the inverted index? No.

    Cluster Health
        Cluster health tells you whether your data is fully protected.
        Green, Everything is healthy.
            Primary ✔, Replica ✔ No problems.
        Yellow, Primary shards exist, but one or more replicas are missing.
            A common example is a single-node Elasticsearch cluster.        
            Primary ✔ Replica ✖
            Elasticsearch will never place a replica on the same node as its primary because that wouldn't provide fault tolerance.
        Red, A primary shard is missing.
            This is serious because some data is no longer available.
            Primary ✖ Replica ✖
            The cluster still works, but if that node crashes, there's no backup copy.

5) ELK process
    Fluent Bit collects the log from the application.
    It sends the JSON document to the Elasticsearch cluster.
    Elasticsearch stores it in the flask-logs index.
    Based on its routing algorithm (a hash of the document ID by default), Elasticsearch selects the appropriate primary shard.
    The document is written to that primary shard.
    Elasticsearch copies the document to all configured replica shards.
    It updates the inverted index, mapping searchable terms (like "payment" or "Database") to the document.
    When you search in Kibana for "Database timeout", Elasticsearch queries all relevant shards in parallel, combines the results, and returns them in milliseconds.

6)Can I increase shards later?
    Primary shards: ❌ No, you cannot simply increase the number of primary shards on an existing index.
    Replica shards: ✅ Yes, you can increase or decrease replicas at any time.

    Create a new index and reindex, Then copy all documents

    Why can replicas be changed anytime?
        Replicas are just copies of primary shards.No data needs to be redistributed because each replica contains the exact same data as the primary shard.

    The number of primary shards cannot be directly increased after an index is 
    created because documents are routed to primary shards using a hash-based routing algorithm. 
    Changing the number of primary shards would require redistributing all existing documents. 
    If more primary shards are needed, we typically create a new index with the desired shard count and use the Reindex API, or use the Split API when its prerequisites are met. 
    Replica shards, however, can be increased or decreased at any time because they are simply copies of primary shards.

7)Index Management
    Imagine you're using ELK for Kubernetes logs.Your application generates around 10 million logs every day.
    After one year: 365 days 3.65 billion logs
    Now the question is:
        Should Elasticsearch store all these logs in one index?
        The answer is No, and that's the motivation behind Index Management.
    
    Index Naming
        An index name is simply the logical name given to a collection of related documents.

    Why don't we store everything in one index?
        Although it uses an inverted index, it still has to search within a very large dataset and manage much larger index structures than necessary.
        Deleting old logs also becomes difficult
        Performance issues.

    Create Daily Indices,Each day's logs go into that day's index.Retention becomes easy.
    No document-by-document deletion.

    Index Alias
        An alias is a logical name that points to one or more indices.
        If your application hardcodes index names, every day you'd need to change the configuration.Not practical.create an alias.
        Alias
        logs-current
        ↓
        logs-2026.07.09

    Rollover
        Rollover creates new indices based on size, age, or document count, making shard sizes more consistent.
        When index reaches 50 GB or 30 days Create a new index automatically.

    Hidden Indices
        Some indices are not meant for users.Elasticsearch itself creates internal indices.
        .kibana .security .tasks

        They store:
            Kibana dashboards
            Saved searches
            Security users
            Roles
            Internal metadata
            Normally, you don't modify these directly.

8)ILM (Index Lifecycle Management)
    Automatically manage an index throughout its lifetime, from creation until deletion.

    Without ILM, someone would have to manually create new indices, move old data, and delete expired logs. With ILM, Elasticsearch does all of this automatically.
    Obviously, we don't want to keep all logs forever on expensive storage.
    This is exactly what ILM solves.

    An Elasticsearch index also has stages.
        Created
        ↓
        Frequently Used
        ↓
        Rarely Used
        ↓
        Almost Never Used
        ↓
        Deleted
    Each stage is called a phase.
        
    